README.md, before:

<h1 align="center">Cluster Setup for DigitalOcean Managed Kubernetes ⚓️</h1>
<p>
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/version-1.0-blue.svg?cacheSeconds=2592000" />
  <a href="https://github.com/wanderindev/do-managed-kubernetes/blob/master/README.md">
    <img alt="Documentation" src="https://img.shields.io/badge/documentation-yes-brightgreen.svg" target="_blank" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://github.com/wanderindev/do-managed-kubernetes/graphs/commit-activity">
    <img alt="Maintenance" src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Maintained%3F-yes-brightgreen.svg" target="_blank" />
  </a> 
  <a href="https://github.com/wanderindev/do-managed-kubernetes/blob/master/LICENSE.md">
    <img alt="License: MIT" src="https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg" target="_blank" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://twitter.com/JavierFeliuA">
    <img alt="Twitter: JavierFeliuA" src="https://img.shields.io/twitter/follow/JavierFeliuA.svg?style=social" target="_blank" />
  </a>
</p>

## About

This repository contains a series of YML files that I used to configure all artifacts and payloads that run on my DigitalOcean managed Kubernetes cluster. 

In this README, I explained how I set up the cluster and share the commands I most frequently use to manage it.

At the end of the README, I list references to useful DigitalOcean documentation.

## Install

To use the project in your development machine, clone it, and go to the project's root:

```sh
git clone https://github.com/wanderindev/do-managed-kubernetes.git
cd do-managed-kubernetes
```

### Create a cluster

Before you can use this repository contents, you must have a Kubernetes cluster running on DigitalOcean.  You can create it following these simple steps:

1. Login to your DigitalOcean account.
2. Click on **Create > Kubernetes** in the top right.
3. Select the region closest to your target audience.
4. In the **"Choose cluster capacity"** section:
   -  Enter a pool name or leave the default.
   -  Select the number of nodes. I've used 2 for almost two years without any issues but choose something that makes sense for your use case.  You can always add or delete nodes as needed later.
   -  Select the node plan.  I use the 2.5 GB RAM / 2 vCPUs
5. Modify the cluster's name or leave the default.
6. Click **Create Cluster**.  Your new cluster will be ready in about 4 minutes. You will get redirected to a **"Getting Started"** page.

### Install management tools

To manage your cluster, you will need ```kubectl``` installed in your terminal.  Visit [this link](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl/) for instructions on how to install it.

You will also need the Helm package manager for Kubernetes.  Visit [this link](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/) for installation instructions.

### Download the config file

Your cluster comes with a configuration file.  You need to download it and place it on the root of the project.  This file allows you to connect to the cluster and issue commands with ```kubectl```.

On the **"Getting Started"** page, go to step 3, and click on **download the cluster configuration file**.  Place the file in the root of the project and rename it ```config.yml```.

Make sure you keep this file out of version control.  Anyone with access to the file contents can connect to your cluster.  Before going any further, add ```config.yml``` to your ```.gitignore``` file.

Finally, you have to make sure there's a KUBECONFIG environment variable pointing to the ```config.yml``` file.  If you use Ubuntu, like me, you can accomplish this by opening the ```.profile``` file:

```sh
sudo vi ~/.profile
```

And pasting at the end:

```sh
# set environment variable with path to kubectl config file
export KUBECONFIG="/mnt/c/Users/jfeli/version-control/do-managed-kubernetes/config.yml"
```
making sure you replace the value with the path to your ```config.yml``` file.

Try connecting to the cluster to make sure everything is all right:

```sh
kubectl get nodes
```

You should see something like this:

```sh
NAME                 STATUS   ROLES    AGE   VERSION
workers-pool-31ety   Ready    <none>   14h   v1.19.3
workers-pool-2a7xn   Ready    <none>   14h   v1.19.3
```

## Set up an Ingress Controller

A Kubernetes Ingress exposes HTTP / HTTPS routes from outside the cluster to services within the cluster.  The rules defined in the Ingress resource control the traffic routing.

The easiest way to set up an Ingress Controller for your cluster is to use the one-click-app-install available in the DigitalOcean marketplace. Note that adding the Ingress will create a load balancer, which will cost $10 per month. 

To add an Ingress controller, login to your DigitalOcean account and follow these steps:

1. Visit the [NGINX Ingress Controller app](https://cloud.digitalocean.com/marketplace/5dcc8254e2339e33d74decd7?i=eedacf).  
2. Click Install App
3. Select your cluster.

You will be redirected to your cluster's overview page.  The installation will take a few minutes.  Once ready, check to make sure it is running:

```sh
kubectl get pods --all-namespaces -l app.kubernetes.io/name=ingress-nginx
```

You should see something like this:

```sh
NAMESPACE       NAME                                        READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
ingress-nginx   nginx-ingress-controller-7fb85bc8bb-4s2sl   1/1     Running   0          2m
```

And you can check the IP for the load balancer by running:

```sh
kubectl get svc -n ingress-nginx
```

You should see something like this:

```sh
NAME                                               TYPE           CLUSTER-IP      EXTERNAL-IP    PORT(S)                      AGE
nginx-ingress-ingress-nginx-controller             LoadBalancer   10.46.26.107    43.35.119.37   80:30068/TCP,443:31110/TCP   3m
nginx-ingress-ingress-nginx-controller-admission   ClusterIP      10.46.75.151    <none>         443/TCP                      3m
nginx-ingress-ingress-nginx-controller-metrics     ClusterIP      10.46.33.11     <none>         9913/TCP                     3m
```

### Deploying pods and services
Deploy all pods and associated services:
```sh
kubectl apply -f ./sites
```
Or deploy individual pods and services, for instance:
```sh
kubectl apply -f ./sites/anafeliu-web.yml
```
### Deploy an Nginx ingress controller and cert-manager
Install Tiller in the cluster:
```sh
kubectl -n kube-system create serviceaccount tiller
kubectl create clusterrolebinding tiller --clusterrole cluster-admin --serviceaccount=kube-system:tiller
helm init --service-account tiller
```
Install the Nginx Ingress Controller, setting the `controller.publishService.enabled` parameter to `true`:
```sh
helm install stable/nginx-ingress --name nginx-ingress --set controller.publishService.enabled=true
```
A load balancer will be created.  Check if its available with:
```sh
kubectl get services -o wide -w nginx-ingress-controller
```
Create a cert-manager custom resource definition and add label to the kube-system namespace: 
```sh
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jetstack/cert-manager/release-0.8/deploy/manifests/00-crds.yaml
kubectl label namespace kube-system certmanager.k8s.io/disable-validation="true"
```
Install cert-manager:
```sh
helm repo add jetstack https://charts.jetstack.io
helm install --name cert-manager --namespace cert-manager jetstack/cert-manager
```
Create a certificate issuer:
```sh
kubectl create -f ./ingress-controller/issuer.yml
```
Create the ingress resource:
```sh
kubectl apply -f ./ingress-controller/ingress.yml
```
Wait a few minutes for the certificates to get issued.  Check progress with:
```sh
kubectl describe certificate letsencrypt-prod
```
Refer to [this source](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-set-up-an-nginx-ingress-on-digitalocean-kubernetes-using-helm)
for more information.
### Setup ExternalDNS 
In the DigitalOcean dashboard, create an Api token and add it to `./ingress-controller/externaldns-values.yml`
Install ExternalDNS:
```sh
helm install stable/external-dns --name external-dns -f ./ingress-controller/externaldns-values.yml
```
Verify that ExternalDNS is ready:
```sh
kubectl --namespace=default get pods -l "app=external-dns,release=external-dns" -w
```
Refer to [this source](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-automatically-manage-dns-records-from-digitalocean-kubernetes-using-externaldns)
for more information.
### Setup cluster monitoring
Install the `prometheus-operator` chart:
```sh
helm install --namespace monitoring --name doks-cluster-monitoring -f ./monitoring/values.yml stable/prometheus-operator
```
Check that all pods (6 in total) are ready:
```sh
kubectl --namespace monitoring get pods -l "release=doks-cluster-monitoring"

NAME                                                          READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
doks-cluster-monitoring-grafana-7b775d756-m8rxj               2/2     Running   0          3m9s
doks-cluster-monitoring-kube-state-metrics-85456956d7-st49f   1/1     Running   0          3m9s
doks-cluster-monitoring-pr-operator-6685fdb84-4xk4m           1/1     Running   0          3m9s
doks-cluster-monitoring-prometheus-node-exporter-tw7d7        1/1     Running   0          3m9s
doks-cluster-monitoring-prometheus-node-exporter-v7m4q        1/1     Running   0          3m9s
```
Create a port-forwarding tunnel for the Grafana service:
```sh
kubectl port-forward -n monitoring svc/doks-cluster-monitoring-grafana 8000:80

Forwarding from 127.0.0.1:8000 -> 3000
Forwarding from [::1]:8000 -> 3000
```
And access it at `http://localhost:8000`. The username is `admin` and the password is in line 16 of `monitoring/values.yml`.  When done with Grafana, close the tunnel with `CTRL-C`.

Create a port-forwarding tunnel for the Prometheus service:
```sh
kubectl port-forward -n monitoring svc/doks-cluster-monitoring-pr-prometheus 9090:9090

Forwarding from 127.0.0.1:9090 -> 9090
Forwarding from [::1]:9090 -> 9090
```
And access it at `http://localhost:9090`.

Create a port-forwarding tunnel for the Alertmanager service:
```sh
kubectl port-forward -n monitoring svc/doks-cluster-monitoring-pr-alertmanager 9093:9093

Forwarding from 127.0.0.1:9093 -> 9093
Forwarding from [::1]:9093 -> 9093
```
And access it at `http://localhost:9093`.

Refer to [this source](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-set-up-digitalocean-kubernetes-cluster-monitoring-with-helm-and-prometheus-operator)
for more information.
### Deploy PostgreSQL
Modify, if needed, the `./postgresql/values-sample.yml` and install the PostgreSQL chart:
```sh
helm install --name wid-pg -f ./postgresql/values-sample.yml stable/postgresql
```
Get the auto generated PostgreSQL password:
```sh
kubectl get secret --namespace default wid-pg-postgresql -o jsonpath="{.data.postgresql-password}" | base64 --decode
```
### Deploy MySQL
Modify, if needed, the `./mysql/values-sample.yml` and install the MySQL chart:
```sh
helm install --name wid-mysql -f ./values-sample.yml stable/mysql
```
Get the auto generated MySQL password:
```sh
kubectl get secret --namespace default wid-mysql -o jsonpath="{.data.mysql-root-password}" | base64 --decode; echo
```

 ## Author

👤 **Javier Feliu**

* Twitter: [@JavierFeliuA](https://twitter.com/JavierFeliuA)
* Github: [@wanderindev](https://github.com/wanderindev)

## Show your support

Give a ⭐️ if this project helped you!

## 📝 License

Copyright © 2019 [Javier Feliu](https://github.com/wanderindev).<br />

This project is [MIT](https://github.com/wanderindev/hr-rest-api/blob/master/LICENSE.md) licensed.

***
_I based this README on a template generated with ❤️ by [readme-md-generator](https://github.com/kefranabg/readme-md-generator)_

Commit message:

docs: Add disclaimer to README

README.md, after:

<h1 align="center">Cluster Setup for DigitalOcean Managed Kubernetes ⚓️</h1>
<p>
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/version-1.0-blue.svg?cacheSeconds=2592000" />
  <a href="https://github.com/wanderindev/do-managed-kubernetes/blob/master/README.md">
    <img alt="Documentation" src="https://img.shields.io/badge/documentation-yes-brightgreen.svg" target="_blank" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://github.com/wanderindev/do-managed-kubernetes/graphs/commit-activity">
    <img alt="Maintenance" src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Maintained%3F-yes-brightgreen.svg" target="_blank" />
  </a> 
  <a href="https://github.com/wanderindev/do-managed-kubernetes/blob/master/LICENSE.md">
    <img alt="License: MIT" src="https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg" target="_blank" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://twitter.com/JavierFeliuA">
    <img alt="Twitter: JavierFeliuA" src="https://img.shields.io/twitter/follow/JavierFeliuA.svg?style=social" target="_blank" />
  </a>
</p>

## Important Note / Disclaimer  

A lot has changed in Kubernetes since I created this README two years ago.  I am in the process of updating my cluster from version 1.14 to 1.19.  As I do that, I will also be updating this document.  

Right now, I can only work 30 minutes a day on this.  I expect to be done by January 17th.  In the meantime, please don't use this repository since the information in it might not be accurate.

## About

This repository contains a series of YML files that I used to configure all artifacts and payloads that run on my DigitalOcean managed Kubernetes cluster. 

In this README, I explained how I set up the cluster and share the commands I most frequently use to manage it.

At the end of the README, I list references to useful DigitalOcean documentation.

## Install

To use the project in your development machine, clone it, and go to the project's root:

```sh
git clone https://github.com/wanderindev/do-managed-kubernetes.git
cd do-managed-kubernetes
```

### Create a cluster

Before you can use this repository contents, you must have a Kubernetes cluster running on DigitalOcean.  You can create it following these simple steps:

1. Login to your DigitalOcean account.
2. Click on **Create > Kubernetes** in the top right.
3. Select the region closest to your target audience.
4. In the **"Choose cluster capacity"** section:
   -  Enter a pool name or leave the default.
   -  Select the number of nodes. I've used 2 for almost two years without any issues but choose something that makes sense for your use case.  You can always add or delete nodes as needed later.
   -  Select the node plan.  I use the 2.5 GB RAM / 2 vCPUs
5. Modify the cluster's name or leave the default.
6. Click **Create Cluster**.  Your new cluster will be ready in about 4 minutes. You will get redirected to a **"Getting Started"** page.

### Install management tools

To manage your cluster, you will need ```kubectl``` installed in your terminal.  Visit [this link](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl/) for instructions on how to install it.

You will also need the Helm package manager for Kubernetes.  Visit [this link](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/) for installation instructions.

### Download the config file

Your cluster comes with a configuration file.  You need to download it and place it on the root of the project.  This file allows you to connect to the cluster and issue commands with ```kubectl```.

On the **"Getting Started"** page, go to step 3, and click on **download the cluster configuration file**.  Place the file in the root of the project and rename it ```config.yml```.

Make sure you keep this file out of version control.  Anyone with access to the file contents can connect to your cluster.  Before going any further, add ```config.yml``` to your ```.gitignore``` file.

Finally, you have to make sure there's a KUBECONFIG environment variable pointing to the ```config.yml``` file.  If you use Ubuntu, like me, you can accomplish this by opening the ```.profile``` file:

```sh
sudo vi ~/.profile
```

And pasting at the end:

```sh
# set environment variable with path to kubectl config file
export KUBECONFIG="/mnt/c/Users/jfeli/version-control/do-managed-kubernetes/config.yml"
```
making sure you replace the value with the path to your ```config.yml``` file.

Try connecting to the cluster to make sure everything is all right:

```sh
kubectl get nodes
```

You should see something like this:

```sh
NAME                 STATUS   ROLES    AGE   VERSION
workers-pool-31ety   Ready    <none>   14h   v1.19.3
workers-pool-2a7xn   Ready    <none>   14h   v1.19.3
```

## Set up an Ingress Controller

A Kubernetes Ingress exposes HTTP / HTTPS routes from outside the cluster to services within the cluster.  The rules defined in the Ingress resource control the traffic routing.

The easiest way to set up an Ingress Controller for your cluster is to use the one-click-app-install available in the DigitalOcean marketplace. Note that adding the Ingress will create a load balancer, which will cost $10 per month. 

To add an Ingress controller, login to your DigitalOcean account and follow these steps:

1. Visit the [NGINX Ingress Controller app](https://cloud.digitalocean.com/marketplace/5dcc8254e2339e33d74decd7?i=eedacf).  
2. Click Install App
3. Select your cluster.

You will be redirected to your cluster's overview page.  The installation will take a few minutes.  Once ready, check to make sure it is running:

```sh
kubectl get pods --all-namespaces -l app.kubernetes.io/name=ingress-nginx
```

You should see something like this:

```sh
NAMESPACE       NAME                                        READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
ingress-nginx   nginx-ingress-controller-7fb85bc8bb-4s2sl   1/1     Running   0          2m
```

And you can check the IP for the load balancer by running:

```sh
kubectl get svc -n ingress-nginx
```

You should see something like this:

```sh
NAME                                               TYPE           CLUSTER-IP      EXTERNAL-IP    PORT(S)                      AGE
nginx-ingress-ingress-nginx-controller             LoadBalancer   10.46.26.107    43.35.119.37   80:30068/TCP,443:31110/TCP   3m
nginx-ingress-ingress-nginx-controller-admission   ClusterIP      10.46.75.151    <none>         443/TCP                      3m
nginx-ingress-ingress-nginx-controller-metrics     ClusterIP      10.46.33.11     <none>         9913/TCP                     3m
```

### Deploying pods and services
Deploy all pods and associated services:
```sh
kubectl apply -f ./sites
```
Or deploy individual pods and services, for instance:
```sh
kubectl apply -f ./sites/anafeliu-web.yml
```
### Deploy an Nginx ingress controller and cert-manager
Install Tiller in the cluster:
```sh
kubectl -n kube-system create serviceaccount tiller
kubectl create clusterrolebinding tiller --clusterrole cluster-admin --serviceaccount=kube-system:tiller
helm init --service-account tiller
```
Install the Nginx Ingress Controller, setting the `controller.publishService.enabled` parameter to `true`:
```sh
helm install stable/nginx-ingress --name nginx-ingress --set controller.publishService.enabled=true
```
A load balancer will be created.  Check if its available with:
```sh
kubectl get services -o wide -w nginx-ingress-controller
```
Create a cert-manager custom resource definition and add label to the kube-system namespace: 
```sh
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jetstack/cert-manager/release-0.8/deploy/manifests/00-crds.yaml
kubectl label namespace kube-system certmanager.k8s.io/disable-validation="true"
```
Install cert-manager:
```sh
helm repo add jetstack https://charts.jetstack.io
helm install --name cert-manager --namespace cert-manager jetstack/cert-manager
```
Create a certificate issuer:
```sh
kubectl create -f ./ingress-controller/issuer.yml
```
Create the ingress resource:
```sh
kubectl apply -f ./ingress-controller/ingress.yml
```
Wait a few minutes for the certificates to get issued.  Check progress with:
```sh
kubectl describe certificate letsencrypt-prod
```
Refer to [this source](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-set-up-an-nginx-ingress-on-digitalocean-kubernetes-using-helm)
for more information.
### Setup ExternalDNS 
In the DigitalOcean dashboard, create an Api token and add it to `./ingress-controller/externaldns-values.yml`
Install ExternalDNS:
```sh
helm install stable/external-dns --name external-dns -f ./ingress-controller/externaldns-values.yml
```
Verify that ExternalDNS is ready:
```sh
kubectl --namespace=default get pods -l "app=external-dns,release=external-dns" -w
```
Refer to [this source](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-automatically-manage-dns-records-from-digitalocean-kubernetes-using-externaldns)
for more information.
### Setup cluster monitoring
Install the `prometheus-operator` chart:
```sh
helm install --namespace monitoring --name doks-cluster-monitoring -f ./monitoring/values.yml stable/prometheus-operator
```
Check that all pods (6 in total) are ready:
```sh
kubectl --namespace monitoring get pods -l "release=doks-cluster-monitoring"

NAME                                                          READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
doks-cluster-monitoring-grafana-7b775d756-m8rxj               2/2     Running   0          3m9s
doks-cluster-monitoring-kube-state-metrics-85456956d7-st49f   1/1     Running   0          3m9s
doks-cluster-monitoring-pr-operator-6685fdb84-4xk4m           1/1     Running   0          3m9s
doks-cluster-monitoring-prometheus-node-exporter-tw7d7        1/1     Running   0          3m9s
doks-cluster-monitoring-prometheus-node-exporter-v7m4q        1/1     Running   0          3m9s
```
Create a port-forwarding tunnel for the Grafana service:
```sh
kubectl port-forward -n monitoring svc/doks-cluster-monitoring-grafana 8000:80

Forwarding from 127.0.0.1:8000 -> 3000
Forwarding from [::1]:8000 -> 3000
```
And access it at `http://localhost:8000`. The username is `admin` and the password is in line 16 of `monitoring/values.yml`.  When done with Grafana, close the tunnel with `CTRL-C`.

Create a port-forwarding tunnel for the Prometheus service:
```sh
kubectl port-forward -n monitoring svc/doks-cluster-monitoring-pr-prometheus 9090:9090

Forwarding from 127.0.0.1:9090 -> 9090
Forwarding from [::1]:9090 -> 9090
```
And access it at `http://localhost:9090`.

Create a port-forwarding tunnel for the Alertmanager service:
```sh
kubectl port-forward -n monitoring svc/doks-cluster-monitoring-pr-alertmanager 9093:9093

Forwarding from 127.0.0.1:9093 -> 9093
Forwarding from [::1]:9093 -> 9093
```
And access it at `http://localhost:9093`.

Refer to [this source](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-set-up-digitalocean-kubernetes-cluster-monitoring-with-helm-and-prometheus-operator)
for more information.
### Deploy PostgreSQL
Modify, if needed, the `./postgresql/values-sample.yml` and install the PostgreSQL chart:
```sh
helm install --name wid-pg -f ./postgresql/values-sample.yml stable/postgresql
```
Get the auto generated PostgreSQL password:
```sh
kubectl get secret --namespace default wid-pg-postgresql -o jsonpath="{.data.postgresql-password}" | base64 --decode
```
### Deploy MySQL
Modify, if needed, the `./mysql/values-sample.yml` and install the MySQL chart:
```sh
helm install --name wid-mysql -f ./values-sample.yml stable/mysql
```
Get the auto generated MySQL password:
```sh
kubectl get secret --namespace default wid-mysql -o jsonpath="{.data.mysql-root-password}" | base64 --decode; echo
```

 ## Author

👤 **Javier Feliu**

* Twitter: [@JavierFeliuA](https://twitter.com/JavierFeliuA)
* Github: [@wanderindev](https://github.com/wanderindev)

## Show your support

Give a ⭐️ if this project helped you!

## 📝 License

Copyright © 2019 [Javier Feliu](https://github.com/wanderindev).<br />

This project is [MIT](https://github.com/wanderindev/hr-rest-api/blob/master/LICENSE.md) licensed.

***
_I based this README on a template generated with ❤️ by [readme-md-generator](https://github.com/kefranabg/readme-md-generator)_
